concerns that we could see the political
upheaval lead to unrest but so far that
hasn't happened
and he's certainly telling the public to
to respect the court and
we'll have to wait and see what plays
out on monday because certainly the
numbers are very tight between the
government and the opposition
okay correspondent natalie whiting and
png thank you very much
defence has grounded 35 australian
warplanes after two crew members were
forced to eject
from a 75 million super hornet during an
aborted takeoff yesterday
in queensland defense correspondent
andrew greene has more
we don't know all the answers yet and
defence has dispatched a team of
investigators to the
amberley air base outside brisbane where
we saw some dramatic pictures yesterday
of an aborted takeoff involving a super
hornet these aircraft australia has
flown for about a decade and they've
done successful deployments to middle
to the middle east but what we saw
yesterday on the
uh runway at amberley was an emergency
as the aircraft tried to take off both
crew members ejected and shortly after
we saw
some emergency services on the scene the
aircraft appears to have
had a bit of damage we believe it may
have been an engine
fault that led to this emergency but at
this point
the answers are still being determined
let's hear from the chief of air force
who says
that the australian defense force is now
taking
uh some precautionary measures we've got
the
the fleet of 24 super hornets
and 11 ea-18g growlers so they will
what we call we've ceased our flying
operations while we review the
circumstances of this incident
andrew how long do we expect this
grounding to be in place
difficult to say the minister
and the chief of air force were both
stressing that this was
a result of trying to be very cautious
this was a step that they were taking to
be utterly
safe they do want to get to the bottom
of the cause of this incident before
they
put the aircraft back in the air now
this latest incident
involved a super hornet it's really the
first incident
to have occurred with our fleet of super
hornets but it is similar to something
we saw
two years ago with an australian growler
aircraft
and that aircraft was trying to take off
in the united states and there was also
a mishap on the runway
the fear is that they could both be
related to the engines which are the
same
engines in both aircraft so we should
in the next few days or weeks get a few
more answers from defence
an interim report into rio tinto's
destruction of indigenous caves is being
handed down
the mining giant took responsibility for
destroying the sacred
duke and gorge caves in western
australia earlier this year
to extract millions of dollars worth of
iron ore
the incident sparked global outrage and
devastated the indigenous community
the parliamentary inquiry considered
considered more than 140 submissions and
heard evidence from dozens of mining
groups
a test case is being filed against
qantas today over its plans to outsource
the jobs of two thousand ground staff
reporter elias kluwer has more from
melbourne
today in federal court the transport
workers union represented by its lawyers
maurice blackburn are serving paperwork
to qantas and the federal court
alleging that qantas's decision to
outsource 2000 workers
across 10 airports is illegal it's
alleging that by
outsourcing this work it can
unilaterally set
a price and therefore circumvent
collective bargaining
and breach the fair work act so in court
today you'll be serving that paperwork
but
the next step is then a hearing in front
of a federal court judge
and then a determination as to whether
it goes forward
the lawyers say that this is an
important
test case and is hoping to overturn the
qantas decision
but will also be seeking damages which
it says
could be in the millions let's have a
listen to their lawyer
under the fair work act it's unlawful
for an employer
to sack employees because they're union
members
it's also unlawful under the fair work
act to sack employees
because they've negotiated collectively
to obtain better terms and conditions of
employment
qantas decision to outsource
is a decision also to dispense with two
thousand
secure jobs and replace them
with insecure cheaper labour qantas says
it already outsources work and will
still have to collectively bargain with
the transport workers union
it says any allegations to the contrary
are false
a million dollar reward has been offered
for information
into the murder of a woman in the new
south wales hunter valley more than
26 years ago melissa hunt's body was
found near a dam
and her family are pleading for answers
so they can finally have some closure
carly cook reports 22 year old melissa
hunt died of severe head injuries
the mother of two's body was found near
a dam at stockhrigton in the hunter
valley on anzac day in 1994.
a strike force was set up to investigate
miss hunt's murder
and a coronal inquest was held in 1998
but no arrests have been made her
brother peter hallett
says it's been a difficult 26 years and
the family need answers
it's time to tell your secrets
i'm appealing on behalf of all who love
melissa
make these 26 years count make this
moment count
by coming forward now with information
to crimestoppers to unsolved homicide
teams to myself
let melissa and all who love her
finally have this small measure of peace
the case is being reinvestigated and the
new south wales government is offering a
million dollar reward for information
leading to the conviction of anyone
associated with miss hunt's murder
homicide squad commander detective
superintendent danny doherty
says a number of people are being
re-interviewed
from what we can gather a lot of people
have left the lake macquarie newcastle
area and have gone into state
we've gone to queensland victoria and
south australia so
police are appealing for those people
also to come forward
in october police returned to the dam
where miss hunt's body was found and
conducted a full review of the crime
scene
items that were recovered during initial
inquiries are also
undergoing further forensic examination
anyone with information no better how
big or small
is being urged to contact crime stoppers
authorities have closed broome's cable
beach after a shark incident this
morning
a man was surfing off the west
australian beach around seven o'clock
when a shark approached him and bit his
board police say the surfer wasn't
injured
but has been left shaken tyne logan has
the latest
well what we know at the moment is that
at seven o'clock this morning here at
cable beach a man who was surfing about
50 meters
offshore was oh his board was bitten by
a shark
reports are that it was a large shark
the species is um
not identified yet now thankfully the
man is uninjured although of course
he's very shaken up it's been considered
a very lucky
escape conditions wise of course it's
incredibly blustery here at the moment
but
that wind that we're experiencing did
mean there was a lot of surface here
because the swell was quite high i was
here at 6 30 this morning and there was
certainly
a lot of people in the water at that
time
now visibility because of that wind and
i guess just the time of year means the
water is incredibly murky as well
you can barely see your toes just wading
into the water just to give you some
kind of picture of the conditions that
we've got here
now it's come as a real shock to the
community i mean this
shark incident is less than a month
after the facial shark attack we had
here at cable beach on the 22nd of
november
where a 58 year old man died and that
shark attack at the time was the first
broom had experienced in
almost three decades so the closeness
in time frame to that shark attack it's
really rocked the community
the beach has been closed uh
indefinitely by authorities and police
are investigating as our fisheries
officials
and i guess we'll find out more as the
day goes on but that's what we know so
far
britons are being told not to let their
guard down after the launch of the
world's first
mass covert 19 vaccination program
thousands of people in the uk have now
been injected with the fisa vaccine
and it's hoped four million will receive
the jab by the end of this month
nick dole reports from london
[Applause]
margaret keenan is still getting used to
all the fuss but the 90 year old hopes
last night's history-making jab
will encourage others to roll up their
sleeves i would say go for it
go for it because it's it's free and
it's the best thing that's ever happened
patient number two was named william
william
shakespeare to jab or not to jab was
barely a question
he was more than willing groundbreaking
i think make a difference to our lives
from now on
the elderly are being given priority in
this program which is by
invitation only kathleen and colleen
wondered whether a visit to hospital
might result in a jab but it wasn't to
be
you're 92 so you're right in line yeah
i'm online for it yeah
yeah probably have it from a christmas
box
we've got to move on and try and be
positive
australian melissa purcell could be
among those next in line
the intensive care nurse caught covered
earlier this year
but she's not sure whether the
antibodies will protect her
sometimes something happens when you're
in a covered bay
and you feel like you've been exposed
being able to go in there with a vaccine
means that you know we can be more
confident and you know my colleagues can
go home to their families feeling safer
in oxford meanwhile there are more
promising signs
the university's vaccine which is also
bound for australia
has been found to be safe and 70
effective
in the first peer-reviewed results but
the pace of progress on vaccines
is making some people nervous a bit too
new a bit too new and
i just don't trust it i don't know if i
would be one of the first ones to take
it
probably not but yeah it's exciting as
exciting as the vaccine's arrival may be
the government here is worried that
people will see it as some sort of a
sign
that the worst is over in fact it'll
take several months to vaccinate even
the most vulnerable
and winter here has only just begun my
message would be
it's amazing to see the vaccine coming
out it's amazing to see this tremendous
shot in the arm for the entire nation
but we can't afford
to relax now but there is time for
celebration
if only for a moment nick dole abc news
london
time now for a look at what's coming up
on the drum here's tonight's host ellen
fanning
three weeks after the bereton report
revealed the scale of misconduct by
australian troops in afghanistan is the
government any closer to paying
reparations to the victims of the
alleged war crimes
the report itself makes it clear
compensation should be paid
but scott morrison says it's not
something he's currently looking at all
that more coming up on the drum
i'm melan fanning see you soon and you
can catch the drum on abc tv tonight at
6 p.m local time
at 9 00 pm eastern daylight time on the
abc news channel
and of course anytime on eye view
and now it's time for the weather with
graham creed and graham the flooding in
the west is likely to extend into
central australia yes we've already got
flood watches out now for the southwest
corner of the northern territory and
also
into south australia i've already had
some very heavy rainfall with a low
pressure system crossing into western
australia
there's still another one sitting well
out off the coast and that will continue
to move across that region
over the next couple of days so we are
still expecting to see the potential of
some heavy rainfall particularly
overnight tonight
it does slowly start to ease off a
little as we move through thursday and
friday but still persists across that
region
and extending into those central areas
of the
continent so the southwest of the
territory
and the northwest pastoral districts of
south australia
now i've also got some fairly widespread
showers and some isolated thunderstorms
across eastern queensland particularly
around the central coast and up
into the peninsula these these regions
are going to remain quite active
over the coming days due to the position
of troughs and moist
onshore winds we've also got some heavy
rainfall on the way to the north coast
of new south wales that's feeding in
around a high pressure system
we could even see a low forming on
monday and that could bring some further
heavy falls and we could also see a
tropical cyclone
sitting out in the region to the east
of new caledonia so that's been watched
very closely
as well but there's rainfall for
tomorrow widespread across the northern
parts of the continent
we have got a southerly wind change
moving through the southeast so that
will bring the potential of some showers
across parts of the southeast
we're not looking at widespread or heavy
falls by any means
but we could see some pushing into
melbourne canberra and also
sydney should be dry through adelaide a
possible thunderstorm in perth and
plenty of shower and thunderstorm
activity and rain across the north
can keep up to date at news.abc.net.u
and on eyeview
here are the top stories on abc news
a new south wales teenager is facing
charges over terrorism-related offences
with police alleging he tried to access
instructions
to make bombs on the internet the 18
year old is alleged to have an extreme
right-wing ideology
linked to white supremacy the teenager
was arrested in albury in the state
south today the federal government
is standing firm in the face of
significant criticism
of its industrial relations legislation
which the union movement and labour
are vowing to fight one of the changes
would give the fair work commission
power to allow businesses hit by covert
to strike pay deals but that would leave
some people worse off
the federal opposition says the
government is using the crisis to cut
workers pay new zealand's prime minister
has paid tribute to the victims of last
year's
white island tragedy 22 people including
17 australians
died when the volcano erupted a year ago
off the coast of
fukutani jacinda ardern says the victims
and we're just going to move now on to
uh the shark attack and a broom surfer
has had a close encounter with the shark
cable beach in wa
sam hesseltine was knocked off his board
before leaving the water with friends
he then found suspected bite marks on
his board the incident comes less than a
month after a 59 year old man was killed
by the shark at the same time
[Music]
home affairs minister peter dutton has
agreed to launch an inquiry into
extremist movements in
australia parliament's joint committee
on intelligence and security
will investigate the motivations
objectives and capacity for violence
by extremist groups including right-wing
and islamist groups
the inquiry will report back with its
findings in april next year
here's greg barton chair in global
islamic politics and
at deakin university speaking to
afternoon briefings
patricia carvillas it's time to do a
stock take and see where we're at
so far we've not joined our five eyes
partners that's to say
the us canada uk new zealand in banning
groups
we ban islamist groups that aren't
largely present in australia
describe them as terrorist groups we're
not far-right groups and it's time to
have a look at that that's what
christine ecmelio forces been calling
for
it does make sense it's a reasonable ask
it might help
to intimidate them from recruiting in
australia makes it easy for police to
operate
if they're not banned they can operate
freely without
easy powers for the police to intervene
so it's worth looking at i think okay
labor says we know a lot about islamist
terror in fact you know
your career is being an expert in it do
they have a point that
putting both of them in this inquiry um
well you know wasn't what they were
calling for they're not opposing it to
be clear but they are making the point
that we know a lot about islamist terror
well look i think it makes sense to uh
go in with an open mind
and try and assess the threat
environment are fresh and we know it's
changed quite significantly we know
there's been a lot of activity in
america and europe this year it's
overlapped with uh covert 19 conspiracy
theories of anxiety
the rise of q anon etc and of course
christchurch attack
in march of last year was a wake-up call
for us it meant that
the threat of an australian carrying out
a terrorist attack driven by far-right
uh ideology was no longer a remote
one-day possibility it had already come
and
that could come here the same weapons
not available in australia but you know
we've had other attacks that have used
cars and knives and
uh other readily available devices so i
think there's a sense of urgency
patricia i think that there's a sense
that we really need to take this clearly
we know that the report from new zealand
released yesterday by the
new zealand parliament and the royal
commission into the christchurch
killings
uh said there was no obvious
intelligence failure in new zealand but
the question is where we paying enough
attention on what this australian was
doing
in australia and i think um you know we
owe it to everyone to pay attention
yes and we're not naming him
deliberately but of course
yesterday the royal commission in new
zealand did hand down
its findings i'd love to get your
reflections
firstly on those findings but then on
what role you think that this inquiry
has
looking at this this man this killer's
activities in australia should it be
doing that kind of work
should it be focused on him well i think
what this uh
the joint parliamentary committee
inquiry will do is look at what asia and
afp and state police have and see
whether perhaps there's more likely
in certain spaces and whether
legislation legislation needs to be
changed
one year ago today new zealand's white
island volcano erupted
22 people lost their lives including 17
australian tourists
there have been emotional scenes at a
ceremony in wakatani
as family and friends of the victims
joined prime minister jacinda ardern
in paying tribute to those who lost
their lives
hmm
today we remember those who passed away
those who were injured their whanau and
everyone affected by this tragic event
and we do take the time to thank all
those involved in the response
and recovery operations
[Music]
he would want me to pick myself up
and get on with life live life to the
fullest as he would
make memories he would say
so i'm taking little steps of the time
and it's his strength and the spirit
and his inspiration that keeps me going
[Music]
important to me and my family to bring
you guys here today because while they
the spirits left their body over there
this is their final resting place
[Music]
we hold you close within our hearts and
there you will remain
to walk with us throughout our lives
until
we meet again zoe we love and miss you
every day
we are so proud of the wonderful person
you were
and the amazing person you would have
become
[Music]
authorities believe the worst of the
bushfire on fraser island is over
with attention now turning to the
recovery of the heritage listed site
joanna marie has the latest the fire
which was started by an illegal campfire
on gary two months ago
is still burning on a number of fronts
but the situation
has certainly improved rain over parts
of the island cooler temperatures
and a wind change all providing some
relief the new south wales rfs
large air tanker has returned home but
smaller water bombing
aircraft and helicopters are still in
the air the fraser coast mayor says he
believes the worst of it is over
so we're not out of this but they over
the last few days
they've really punched through and taken
a lot out of the fire
um and we're hoping that it'll be um you
know they can continue with some good
conditions
to really try and extinguish it and
hopefully we'll get some rain between
now
and the end of the weekend we are
looking in
like we're in a much better position
than we were 48 hours ago but
we're not out of the woods yet but we
are in a stage now where we also need to
concurrently at the same time is
fighting the fire start talking about
the recovery
um and the reopening of the island there
are signs the bush is starting to
regenerate in places
and tourist spots including eli creek
have been untouched by the blaze
travel to the island is still restricted
to residents and essential services
it's been a difficult time for
businesses and tourism operators off the
back of the pandemic
they're hoping visitors will be allowed
to return as early as next week
authorities are expected to make a
decision on the reopening of the island
in the coming days and with dangerous
fires already threatening communities
this summer
the federal government is rolling out
satellites with wi-fi
to help people stay connected in the
last deadly bushfire season tens of
thousands of australians lost mobile
coverage when the power went out
while these options provide bubbles of
satellite wi-fi
they don't solve rather the major mobile
black spot problems communities faced
anna henderson reports from outside
canberra
we're here at nemaji national park just
outside of canberra which was severely
impacted by the black summer fires and
just behind me through these trees
is the visitors center which also acts
as an evacuation point
for people who live in the surrounding
area here it's the first
place to get a satellite installed that
will help people get access to wi-fi
during a bush fire even when they don't
have mobile telecommunications
this is part of a big spend by the
federal government of about 37
million dollars towards dealing with
better connectivity
for people dealing with natural
disasters particularly bushfires
cyclones
and floods it can't be understated how
important good communications
in rural environments and remote
environments
can be when you're moving people around
when you're
under the threat of fire and fast moving
fires
one of the other things the government
is announcing is on the other side of me
it's this truck which drives in to an
evacuation point or somewhere where a
natural disaster has occurred
you can get wi-fi connection within 20
meters
of the truck apparently dozens of people
at once
can access mobile wi-fi at that point to
get a message out if they need to tell
people that they're all right
and they don't have access to mobile
telecommunications
we'll end up with a fleet of 15 of them
with the new ones being added
positioned around the country to be able
to move very quickly into a disaster
situation
they can provide connectivity for
members of the community citizens who've
been affected by natural disaster
but what they can also do is provide
connectivity to
emergency services the government's been
under pressure to spend this money and
really we're only seeing the details of
this money now
well into the next fire season there
have been members
of the government's own front bench who
have been pushing for this money to be
spent more quickly
labour is also criticizing the
government for failing to spend
tens of millions of dollars in extra
mitigation funding that's broader money
which has been budgeted for
but which the government says it doesn't
need to spend at this point it's quite
frankly inexplicable
that of that fund 200 million dollars
available each financial year
so 400 million dollars has been
available up to this point
not a single dollar of that has been
spent
labor says there are projects all over
the country
that could have better prepared
communities for this fire season
the baggy green cap that sir donald
bradman wore for his test debut is being
auctioned for the very first time
some estimates say it will go for more
than a million dollars
but it can only be sold to someone in
australia the cap is captured under the
cultural heritage act so it can't be
taken overseas
tom thompson is a sports historian and
antique valuer
and he joins me now tom good afternoon
hi
hi eliza uh now this is this story has
got everything going for it let's start
with the fact that this is don bradman's
first baggie green
who is the current owner of the cap
that's being auctioned off today
well it was owned by peter dunham but
it's now owned by an insolvency trust
uh that is effectively the vendor so
it's got a sort of a sad side to it but
a very poignant
story to do with bradman's gifting okay
so tell us a bit more about
what what type of man bradman was with
all this incredible
um memorabilia well the extraordinary
thing is he gave
almost every single thing away which is
very much part and parcel of his
character now he knew this family
certainly in the early 50s and he
um he and jesse were very close to them
mr dunham dies the wife goes to
take a job at melbourne hospital and
then finally
to come back bradman finds a house right
next door
that abuts their property in holden
street kensington park
but two weeks after she arrives as she
dies
unexpectedly the extraordinary thing
then
bradman takes a mentoring role with the
son peter
and gifts him this cap now this is the
very first one there might only be
four tests on it but this is the first
uh
test cap of the greatest test player in
the world
the babe ruth of cricket so it has
value there the beautiful thing though
is
bradman writes to the abc's rowan rivet
and and and says that um the sun is now
all alone in the world
but he doesn't say anything about
gifting the cap
it's very much it says so much about
bradman's approach
you know he is terribly interested in
mentoring
in the community these were close
friends he would do anything for them
and they both passed away
but what happened with dunham is that he
went on to become a fraudster
uh which is fascinating do we know that
if
um we'll get to the the value of the cap
in a moment but
the the the proceeds from the sale today
will they go
to the creditors
i think so my understanding is they will
uh at the moment he ha
he has paid back eight hundred thousand
of uh one point
something million dollars that he was um
in debit for
wow it was bankrupted
[Music]
the reality is it's been forced on the
insolvency group because this has value
i i struggle with the million dollars
because
i can't leave australia and hence you
don't have
the intense bidding from indians and uh
british and
and um and americans that would normally
go on for such an option
all right so you know as you're saying
when we look at
the value of things like don bradman's
baggy green
it's not just financial is it give us an
insight into
how australians value one of a very rare
commodity don
bradman's baggy green caps
well there's 13 of them but um
almost none of them are in uh in private
hands it's as simple as that
uh they won't be coming out it's like
the bats
there's lots of bats but but the reality
is
bradman represents australia represents
australia coming of age in the in
particularly in the 1930s series
bradman goes through post-war and wins
again for australia um he's
extraordinary there's nothing like him
so it's like it's it's like the far lap
of such things that is all the people
want
winning and could see him going about
the
process of winning there's nothing like
him and there never will be
all right so am i right in saying that
you uh corresponded
uh you know for years and met bradman in
putting together
uh some of your history oh yes i
i published his memoir farewell to
cricket and
the art of cricket and a cd-rom version
of it and out of that
bradman invited me down to his house
32 times which i only thought about that
because i found out that steve wall was
only asked once
but then that's the joy of publishing
you have to go about doing things
and my interest was his memorabilia
where he signed
things what he did uh we
i found he was interested in poetry he
was interested in history
he was interested in uh bookmaking he
was interested in wine
he grilled me for two hours before he
said yes um
uh what did he want to know uh he wanted
to know
whether i really knew about cricket
right and uh luckily i i had
memorized the 1930 series when i was
about 10
every newspaper and so it all came out
on the right day at the right time well
done you can work under pressure tom
thompson i want to know
does cricket have the same role in
australian life now
as it did decades ago that's a really
good question i think it's changing
and it's changed drastically partly
because of the players
and the clouds that some of them have
been under
as well it's international but it was
international
then i think there's a chance we've got
great players who
have the ability to take us to the
heights of
bradman uh steve smith i think is one
for example
so i would like to think that with steve
smith's redemption and
one hopes that he continues to
play this sort of soul-searching role of
trying to get
people to uh come to the game
enjoy the game and see and play an
australian way
like bradman wanted sports historian tom
thompson thank you very much for your
time today
thanks so much research by the salvation
army shows more than 8.1 million
australians are feeling financially
stressed this christmas
after the devastating financial and
emotional impacts of covert 19
bushfires and drought this year many
more australians are also feeling
anxious
depressed and lonelier than the same
time last year
major david collinson is with the new
south wales salvation army
and he says people's mental health is
taking a hit
this year with bush fires the drought
and covert 19 of course it's
been our biggest strain on our services
so there's a lot of people in need more
than ever
before so yeah our door's been knocked
on for sure
yeah well a lot of people obviously have
lost income
so they're straining on buying presents
food for families
all these things are really stretching
families financially
and there's a lot of stress too
emotional stress
and your mental health is probably an
all-time high as well so
there's a lot of need out there at this
time obviously our
our centers uh because of the size of
some of them
uh we can only have half the number of
volunteers in those centers but we've
also got some challenges because
a lot of our volunteers are over the age
of 70. uh so there's some
coverage restrictions there as well so
we just have to
be really careful and uh innovate like
most businesses are at this time and
most charities are at this time so
we're doing our very best but we've been
able to uh
we're giving out 30 000 hampers this
christmas
we're giving out half a million um gifts
and toys this christmas
and we're also able to help 50 000
families in need so it's
a great opportunity for us to be able to
help and support
families in need australians are so
supportive and so helpful and so
generous and we want to thank
all the australians that help us in this
country every day to be the great
organization we are
but uh of course we're looking to raise
12 million
this christmas and we're halfway there
so if you're able to help
salvation army dot org dot a u is a
place to go
the elderly owner of a dilapidated
mansion overlooking the brisbane river
has one more week to pay her rates bill
or potentially face having the property
sold the heritage-listed building known
as
lamb house has been vacant and crumbling
for years
it's prompted a call for the state's
heritage laws to be totally rewritten
it's a grand house in the most
impressive of locations
perched above the river at kangaroo
point the mansion known as lamb
house is a rare example of federation
architecture
lamb house is very important to the
heritage of brisbane
a beautiful iconic landmark in brisbane
one of our oldest houses in our oldest
residential suburbs
built in 1902 for john lamb the owner of
a city drapery store it's been owned by
the family ever since
but the property is crumbling open to
the elements
squatters and vandals it's in a very bad
state of disrepair the owner joy lam
moved out years ago and a deadline now
looms
she has one week to pay three years
worth of council rates
the bill is confidential but with the
land valued at more than six million
dollars it's undoubtedly large
with any house that has unpaid rates
over a significant period of time the
next step
is to put a notice of intention to sell
heritage advocates want the house
protected
brisbane city council and the state
government should buy the property
and it should be restored fully restored
and
then opened to the public it would be a
bit awkward for
us to put a notice of intention to sell
as brisbane city council and then be the
purchaser
an order is in place to prevent any
demolition by the owner and the council
has proposed a zoning change to make
sure the land is never
developed our heritage laws are broken
there is no question about that because
we're not protecting what's important
it's not just houses or buildings it's
their surroundings that we need to be
protecting
the state government says it can't buy
the property and it's the owners of
heritage listed places who are
responsible for their preservation
it says mrs lam can apply for a heritage
grant to undertake repairs but hasn't
joy lam lives in a unit nearby and says
she wants the house to remain in her
family's hands
she blames damage from nearby
construction and years of council
and state government in decision for the
property's decline
she says she will pay the rate spill in
a city that's lost
so many iconic buildings the future of
lamb house remains uncertain
emma pollard abc news
as time for the weather now with graham
creed and graham it's a wet and stormy
week ahead in the west yes it is we've
not only
got flood watches flood warnings and the
potential of further heavy falls across
the north
but we've also got a severe thunderstorm
warning in the south at the moment this
is for damaging winds and also the
potential of large hail
this is sitting through areas well
inland of perth at the moment
it's developing along a trough line
across the region
but of course we have those more
widespread severe weather warnings
up across much of the kimberley into the
parts of the pilbara and interior
this is for the potential of heavy
rainfall that now extends through
into the southwest of the northern
territory and the northeast
of south australia that rain will
persist in those areas and also extend a
little bit further east across much of
the northern territory and into south
australia
as we move into the weekend but it
dissipates before it moves
into the eastern states but we are still
seeing some thunderstorms through
queensland at the moment
the moisture for these is coming in off
the pacific ocean they're fairly
widespread
through much of the northern half of the
east and they're expected to continue
over the next couple of days but we also
have some further rainfall
coming into new south wales now this is
associated with an onshore wind flow
and some of that moisture is also being
fed through by that high
and a potential tropical cyclone
developing
out in the south pacific so that system
will be lost it's not expected to have
any impact
whatsoever on australia but as you can
see that moist air mass
is moving through from the south of that
system across the ocean and bringing
that moisture through
into the east coast so tomorrow we've
got plenty more rainfall through western
australia
into the northern territory and south
australia southerly wind change will
move through the southeast now this will
bring a few isolated showers we're not
looking at heavy or widespread falls
but it's partly that southerly wind
change it's going to increase the
rainfall in new south wales later
and remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.eu
and on eyeview carina cavalio will have
more news next
stay with us
[Music]
hey
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad-free
as australia face-off against fierce
rivals india taking the catch behind
every test all the rivalry called live
at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio
and the abc listen app whenever you want
wherever you are know the story with abc
news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news.abc.net.edu or download the
news app
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my eyes i just can't take my eyes
off
of you it's the way that i feel
when i'm looking at you doing the things
that you do
you're mad i'm mad you're mad
we're all mad good evening and welcome
to news at six
last thing i need right now is to get
involved with a married woman i've got
my reputation to think of
what do you know about what i want to
achieve let's just pretend that we live
in the real world
where else would you rather be it's jack
jack
[Music]
where will you find the best aussie
content
abc eye view i'm australian it's in my
dna
with homegrown heroes local legends
rap bags and rebels scandalous i use
got them all just own it ready to stream
free
any time no no no i'm good
it's all yours to stream on abc eye view
spiks and specs returns for a special
episode celebrating music of the 2010s
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
see you very soon australia this fix and
specs 2010 special
on abc and eye view
all right so let's all please bring our
a game
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes of humanity
depending on what character i'm doing it
makes me more brave
i've always enjoyed people who have
beliefs that they're certain about
real sincere belief is like rocket fuel
what the hell was that that was
unexpected
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1. it's been a year
like no other unprecedented unimaginable
unfathomable there's only one way to
look back on the year that was
20 bloody 20.
[Applause]
wednesday december 23 on abc and iview
a new south wales teenager faces
terrorism-related charges
after accessing bomb-making material
[Music]
online
labor and the unions vow to fight the
government's proposed
industrial relations changes which they
say will leave
workers worse off
new zealand and australia pause to
remember the victims of the white island
volcano tragedy one year on
and uk rugby players say they'll sue
after their sport
left them with brain damage
hello welcome to abc news i'm carina
cavallo
a new south wales teenager with alleged
extreme right-wing views is facing
terrorism-related charges
with police saying he's supported and
wanted to be involved
in a mass casualty event sarah garethy
reports
police had been following the teenager's
online behavior since
august and say he followed an extreme
right-wing ideology
and had accessed neo-nazi and white
supremacist material
as well as bomb-making instructions
which he'd sought to share with others
it's alleged that the teenager also made
a number of social media posts
advocating acts of violence against
non-white australians
including members of the jewish and
muslim communities
they say they moved to arrest him this
morning after what they describe as an
escalation in his behaviour including a
social media post in which he allegedly
discussed being involved in a mass
casualty event
a couple of days ago what we observed
was an escalation in the tone which went
to a support of a
mass casualty event and potentially his
involvement in that event
and then there was a post i think up
until very in the very early hours of
this morning
uh which actually expressed support for
a pre previous mass casualty shooting
that had occurred
internationally police have stressed
that nothing specific was planned
but they say that they judged the risk
too great and they moved to
execute a search warrant at his home
they expect the 18 year old to be
charged with a number of terrorism
offences
including advocating terrorism and
urging violence against members of
groups
businesses would be allowed to strike
pay deals that leave
some workers worse off as part of the
federal government's proposed overhaul
of industrial relations laws
the minister responsible christian
porter says the changes are needed to
help the economy rebound after the
covert 19 pandemic
but labour and the unions argue it's a
nasty plan to cut
workers pay for more let's speak to
political reporter jane norman in
canberra jane what exactly is the
government proposing
well karina the government is proposing
to make several changes to industrial
relations
laws we've had a series of announcements
this week but today
um the industrial relations minister
christian porter has presented the whole
package of ir reforms
to parliament and it seems he's left the
most contentious
changes to last and that relates to
enterprise bargaining and the boot
the better off overall test the
government basically wants to
suspend the boot on workplace
deals on workplace pay deals meaning
that businesses affected by covert can
effectively
cut workers pay and conditions for the
next two years
now this boot the better off overall
test is designed to ensure that any new
workplace deal that's struck between an
employer and an employee will leave the
employee
better off when compared to the baseline
awards
wages the availability under the award
so christian porter wants to make
businesses exempt
from that test he says just for the next
two years he says it's a simple change
simply extending an emergency
circumstances provision that's already
available in the law
and he believes it's what's needed to
help keep businesses
open and thriving here's how he
characterized the changes today
so what we want to do is make it very
very clear
that this common sense exemption power
can exist specifically for covert
and for a period slightly longer than
what legally would be considered a
short-term crisis
that's it and look as you say it's
there's going to be discussions around
this but it seems to me that
there's a bit of an outrage industry
that goes on and they've got to find
something to attach their outrage to
and so they've attached it to page 34.
and jane it looks like the coalition
will have a fight on its hands doesn't
it
yeah absolutely i mean it's interesting
to listen to christian porter's language
he's using words like modest changes
incremental changes he's steering clear
of the word radical i mean the coalition
is still scarred from the work choices
fight of over a decade ago
so they've been very very cautious in
how they frame these
changes labor though is absolutely up
for a fight on this one
um its response today was fierce anthony
albanese
effectively signaling that labor will
oppose either the bill
or huge chunks of it
the industrial relations spokesman tony
burke basically described it as a bill
to
cut wages now the actu which was heavily
involved in the
months of negotiations leading up to
this point is deeply disappointed by the
bill that's been presented today
um sally mcmatus was you know jokingly
described as christian porter's best
friend for now during the height of the
coveted crisis when they were
negotiating the wage subsidy
it appears now the kind of cosy
relationship has really deteriorated
she's worried that this move to allow
businesses to be exempt from the boot
will
create a race to reduce wages that if
one business is allowed to
you know cut wages and conditions well
then other businesses in that same
sector will
do the same but as i mentioned when it
comes to the debate here in parliament
labor is signaling it's very much
opposed to this bill so
let's take a listen to the reaction from
anthony albanese and
tony burke today this is a nasty act
from a nasty government that is
returning to form
when it comes to attacking workers
wages and conditions it's quite
extraordinary
that the minister and the government are
conceding
that in spite of setting up a
process to engage with business and
unions
there was no consultation with unions
about some of these draconian
measures this is what a pay cut looks
like
this pay cut is the government's
christmas present
to workers who got us through the
pandemic
that was the shadow industrial relations
minister tony burke there karina
signaling that
labour is absolutely gearing up for a
fight on these proposed changes to
industrial relations laws
reporting from canberra a report into
the coronavirus outbreak in tasmania's
northwest in april has found
it is not possible to identify a single
major cause that sparked the crisis
the independent review has made 37
recommendations to improve
future responses the recommendations
include improvements to the command
and control structure within the health
department and government
i.t systems independent reviewer greg
malik
sc praised the efforts of hospital staff
however he noted transmission of the
virus among hospital staff was a major
component of the outbreak
rather than the more anticipated
patient-to-staff
transmission one of the biggest factors
was
the lack of appreciation of the
potential for staff to staff
transmissions of covert 19.
people were particularly concentrating
on patient to staff
but most of the transmissions in the
northwest hospital occurred
staff to staff the
health department had a new secretary
who recognized some problems with the
old
management structures and had just put
in place some new ones
and then they got sorely tested as soon
as this outbreak occurred
they came through it fairly well and as
premier said the
state emergency management systems and
the department of health deserve a lot
of credit
for the containing of the outbreak the
new south wales premier says she can't
guarantee there won't be more quarantine
breaches after a second case of an
international traveler flying into
melbourne from sydney
it's been revealed the man flew from the
u.s to sydney and on to melbourne in
july
he was forced into quarantine after
concerns were raised about
his claim that he was exempt jane
edwards reports
britons are being told not to let their
guard down after the launch of the
world's first mass
covert 19 vaccination program thousands
of people in the uk
have now been injected with the pfizer
bayern tech
vaccine and it's hoped 4 million will
receive the jab by the end of the month
nick dole reports from london
[Applause]
margaret keenan is still getting used to
all the fuss but the 90 year old hopes
last night's history-making jab
will encourage others to roll up their
slaves i'll say go for it
go for it because it's it's free and
it's the best thing that's ever happened
patient number two was named william
william
shakespeare to jab or not to jab was
barely a question
he was more than willing groundbreaking
i think make a difference to our lives
from now on
the elderly are being given priority in
this program which is by invitation only
kathleen and colleen wondered whether a
visit to hospital
might result in a jab but it wasn't to
be
you're 92 so you're right in line yeah
yeah i mean
for it yeah yeah probably from a
christmas box
we've got to move on and try and be
positive
australian melissa purcell could be
among those next in line
the intensive care nurse caught covered
earlier this year
but she's not sure whether the
antibodies will protect her
sometimes something happens when you're
in a covered bay
and you feel like you've been exposed
being able to go in there with a vaccine
means that you know we can be more
confident and you know my colleagues can
go home to their families feeling safer
in oxford meanwhile there are more
promising signs
the university's vaccine which is also
bound for australia
has been found to be safe and 70
effective
in the first peer-reviewed results but
the pace of progress on vaccines
is making some people nervous a bit too
new a bit too new and
i just don't trust it i don't know if i
would be one of the first ones to take
it
probably now but yeah it's exciting as
exciting as the vaccine's arrival may be
the government here is worried that
people will see it as some sort of a
sign
that the worst is over in fact it'll
take several months to vaccinate
even the most vulnerable and winter here
has only just begun
my message would be it's amazing to see
the vaccine coming out it's amazing to
see this
tremendous shot in the arm for the
entire nation but we can't afford
to relax now but there is
time for celebration if only for a
moment
nick dole abc news london
there have been emotional scenes at a
ceremony in whakatani in new zealand to
mark one year since the white island
volcano eruption
22 people died including 17 australian
tourists
family and friends joined the prime
minister jacinda arden
in paying tribute to the victims
hmm
today we remember those who passed away
those who were injured their whanau and
everyone affected by this tragic event
and we do take the time to thank all
those involved in the response
and recovery operations
[Music]
he would want me to pick myself up
and get on with life live life to the
fullest as he would
make memories he would say
so i'm taking little steps of the time
and it's and his strength
and this inspiration that keeps me going
[Music]
it's important to me and my family to
bring
you guys here today because while they
their spirits left their body over there
this is their final resting place
[Music]
we hold you close within our hearts and
there you will remain
to walk with us throughout our lives
until
we meet again zoe we love and miss you
every day
we are so proud of the wonderful person
you were
and the amazing person you would have
become
[Music]
a man who murdered australian tourist
sean mckinnon in new zealand last year
has been sentenced to life in prison
twenty-four-year-old mark garson shot mr
mckinnon twice while he was in a camper
van with his girlfriend
near raglan in august last year garson
pleaded guilty to murder and threatening
to kill mckinnon's fiance bianca buckley
he has a minimum non-parole period of 15
years and
six months china has banned
timber exports from two more states as
it widens its campaign of trade
sanctions against australia
it comes in the wake of beijing's move
to extend bans on two australian
lamb exporters and block imports from
two more australian abattoirs
the abc's foreign affairs reporter
stephen judgets has more
the rationale that's been offered is
pests the chinese government says that
it uncovered earlier this month's
pests in timber log exports from both
south australia
and also from tasmania and as a result
it's effectively suspended all
importations now this isn't the first
time that china has targeted timber
we've already seen timber ban
from queensland and victoria for
identical reasons and that might explain
why when you look at the wider context
the australian government remains pretty
skeptical about the reason that's been
offered
this is pretty clearly a now a widely
escalating campaign
of economic punishment which is being
meted out by beijing
and it means that every single trade
action that's taken
against australian products is
inevitably seen
through that through that lens if you
like so that doesn't mean that the
australian authorities know for sure
that there's nothing going on here or
that there are no pests
but the sheer scale and breadth of this
campaign the sheer number of australian
imports
that have now been targeted has fed into
this sense in canberra that
this is no coincidence that this is
basically a pattern of economic coercion
up until now they've largely been saying
that behind closed doors whilst
in public they've been maintaining that
china simply has to provide the reason
for these for these trade strikes but
that's shifting the government's
patience is basically wearing thin
the supposed benefits of staying quiet
on this are basically wearing away
and the government's now increasingly
determined to call a spade a spade
we saw that this morning when the trade
minister simon birmingham got to his
feet in the senate
and essentially accused china of
breaching trade rules now he's not
saying
that every instance of economic
punishment or every trade sanction
that's been taken is necessarily
illegitimate
but he's basically saying that there is
a pattern emerging here
and australia is finding it increasingly
difficult to take chinese professions
that this is purely a technical or a
customs matter
at face value and i think as this
campaign widens as everyone expects that
it will
that the australian government's public
criticisms of beijing and its public
denunciations
are likely to grow ever louder
and the obc is taking a closer look at
the rise of china in a special
series from the foreign correspondent
program you can watch the next episode
this saturday night
on the news channel at half past eight
eastern daylight time
or head to iview to watch all nine
episodes on demand
now papua new guinea's supreme court has
ordered the country's parliament to sit
next monday after weeks of political
turmoil it comes as the country's
opposition leader calls for the prime
minister to resign
p g correspondent natalie whiting has
more
we've had weeks of political turmoil
here in papua new guinea
the opposition uh has recently gained
significant
uh number of mps we saw dozens of mps
crossed from the government and joined
the opposition
it used its numbers uh to take control
of parliament last month and to adjourn
it
this month as part of a plan to try to
oust the current prime minister
but the government uh overruled that the
speaker overruled that and the
government went back and then adjourned
it
until april trying to stave off this
attack so we were left with
the opposition saying parliament should
sit in december and the government
saying no it should sit in april and it
was uh sent to the supreme court for a
decision
the court has uh basically ruled with
the opposition it found that
it was constitutional in the way that it
adjourned parliament and so it said
because that was constitutional
then there was no reason for the speaker
to overrule it
uh and for the government to go back uh
into parliament and adjourn until april
so they said
parliament should have been sitting in
december and they ordered that it did
sit on monday so this coming monday we
will see parliament
sitting again it also meant that the
government's budget
which was passed on that day which was
now deemed invalid
it means the budget is also deemed
invalid so some questions there as well
the opposition was obviously very happy
with this decision as i've mentioned
they're currently trying to change the
government they want to oust
the prime minister james morape we've
had several weeks of
the two groups discussing numbers both
saying now that they will have a
majority
the opposition says it's confident that
it will have the the most mps when it
comes to parliament sitting
and outside court the opposition leader
belden nama
had some pretty strong words for the
prime minister i am now
calling on honourable james marapay to
do the right thing by the people of this
country
to resign as the prime minister
effectiveness of today mr morape has
released a statement saying that he
won't be resigning
uh that uh he said that he believes uh
he can keep control he's going to
he's told the opposition they need to
show their numbers on the floor of
parliament
uh which will be on monday he's also
called on people to respect the ruling
of the supreme court
which is good to see because there were
some concerns that we could see the
political upheaval
lead to unrest but so far that hasn't
happened
and he's certainly telling the public to
to respect the court and
we'll have to wait and see what plays
out on monday because certainly the
numbers are very tight between the
government and the opposition
a parliamentary inquiry has recommended
rio tinto
pay restitution to traditional owners
for destroying
sacred rock shelters in the pilbara
earlier this year the company
blasted 46 000 year old
site despite warnings of its cultural
significance the report has
just been made public and we will get
more information on the details of the
report shortly
well with community transmission under
control businesses are slowly beginning
to bring employees back
into the workplace many workers are
eager to return but others have enjoyed
working from home
and want more workplace flexibility for
more i'm joined by richard spencer from
business
australia richard spencer thank you so
much for your time what planning is
required to get workers back into office
buildings
uh good evening look i think there is um
lots of things that businesses and
organizations need to be
thinking about and when they're starting
to transition their employees back into
the workplace
and i think very few organizations had
the opportunity to plan
their entry into the kobit 19 crisis but
everybody has the opportunity to plan
their way out and i think
um what organizations need to do is
start communicating and conversing with
their employees
and asking them where they think they'd
be best to work how how those working
arrangements might work best for them
um are they ready to come back in by
using public transport what are the
concerns they have might have around
physical distancing or collaborative
working in the workplace
and try and ensure that everybody both
employers and employees feel
um safe and able to work most
productively in
in the best place in the best
environment yeah how do workers feel
about a return to the office
i think it's it's um it's been an
incredibly unusual
eight or nine months for lots of uh
typically office based workers
um and i think paradoxically many will
tell you that um
they've probably never worked harder or
worked longer hours um
but but i've actually achieved a better
work-life balance by
being able to to balance their time
better between work and family and
even not commuting for 45 minutes each
way every day provides significantly
greater time you can spend with families
so i think employers and employees need
to start thinking about um
you know rather than rather than
thinking about how do we go back to
where we were in january and february of
this year think about how can we go
forward to a new environment which is
actually probably more productive or
could be more productive
and also you know continue that
work-life balance that many
office workers have been able to enjoy
over the last eight or nine years so you
think even with the mass
vaccination roll out that office life
won't
ever be what it was before the pandemic
never say never but um i would be very
surprised if if
if office life went back to exactly what
it looked like in january and february
of this year because i think
some things without a shadow of it are
better done in an office environment in
a collaborative working environment
and i think actually some meetings and
and and somewhat
and some working requirements are
actually better done remotely um
either either via a remote working
environment or a remote meeting
environment
or to allow people and the quiet time
that they might be able to get at home
to do
um to focus on on a particular piece of
work that maybe they can't achieve in
the office
i i think that the the the shift the
part of the shift that the lots of
people who experience is that work is
something i do not necessarily a place i
go to
and so i think that that will con some
of that thinking will continue um for
many years to come
you touched on this earlier which is
what some of business needs to consider
when bringing people back in terms of
the logistics
are businesses looking at things like
staggered start time so that there
aren't long lines for lifts in big
office buildings and
considerations around public transport
absolutely and i think being agile being
nimble
being responsive being flexible are all
um traits that both employers and
employees need to consider during this
transition back to the workplace
um i think staggered start times makes a
huge amount of sense
um in general terms but al certainly in
terms of helping people
transition back to the workplace and i
think it is a transition back
because eight or nine months spent away
from from
an office working environment a long
time and certainly gives you an
opportunity to get used to working in
different formats in different
environments
and i know certainly in our in our
workplace we have some
members of staff who've not been back in
the office now for for nearly nine
months so
it is definitely a change and it's
something that that employers are going
to have to be flexible about but i think
done properly uh done honestly openly
transparently
and in a very transparent way between
employees employers and employees
sorry and we can actually find a better
way of working a more productive way of
working rather than trying to go back to
wherever
it's not just about the office workers
though is it because cbd economies
have struggled all across the country as
workers stayed home so the flow on
effect to retail and to hospitality has
been huge
yes they're absolutely correct and like
i think it's really important for the
it's hugely important for the for the
australian economy that we do get back
to a semblance of normal
um but i think uh in fact to make the
same mistake myself but saying we get
back to a semblance of normal we
actually need to go forward to something
which is new
and a new way of working in a new
environment in which we are we're
working
because again paradoxically some of the
the cafes and restaurants and
service environments in in suburban or
village areas have actually done better
than they would have traditionally done
over the last eight or nine months
because more people have been working
remotely
so i think if we can find the right
balance and hopefully we can we can
continue to drive
economic growth in in all parts of the
economy but also find a way that you
know
um that office workers can continue to
be as productive
as i think they have been over the last
eight or nine months and we've certainly
demonstrated i think
um as a society that we can work
comfortably and remotely
and in fact that kind of almost like the
digital revolution we were promised 20
30 years ago
almost needed a pandemic to actually
kick it into gear to allow us to really
use the technology to its best
capabilities
rather than almost use that to shortcut
some of the things we were originally
doing in an analog environment
and when do you think that this
transition should begin happening should
it start happening now or should we wait
until
the new year after the christmas break i
think actually many organizations have
already started that process because
there is uh there is the physical
transition of when people will begin to
to return to working in office
environments but the planning for that
has actually already started in a number
of different organizations
because some of it is about um
scheduling and organizing
um appropriate rosters for people to be
in in safe physically distance working
environments
in other cases it might be restructuring
floor plates or or meeting room
environments to make them suitable for a
hybrid working environment
where you have some staff in the office
and some working from home
and i i imagine and given that we've
really only got
a few working days left of this
particular year before christmas and new
year kicks in most
offices are probably like to start
transitioning back in the new year but
but
some i know already have and and some
will i imagine start testing that
process next week
richard spencer good to talk to you
thanks for your time my pleasure thanks
for having me
returning now to the report into the
duke and gorge that has just been made
public political reporter anna henderson
joins me now from canberra
anna what does the committee want to see
happen in terms of damages
well karina we know that this committee
did extensive and forensic work it held
a number of public hearings and
committee members
from the parliament travelled to the
pilbara to conduct a site visit and
speak directly with traditional owners
before preparing
this interim report and it is very
clearly
making a number of recommendations about
what rio tinto
the company responsible for destroying
the site needs to do
uh in terms of dealing with the
traditional owners and
at the very top of that list according
to these recommendations
is that rio tinto needs to negotiate a
compensation package
uh over the destruction of the rock
shelters just in the last few moments
we've spoken to one of the members
of that parliamentary committee patrick
dodson uh senator dodson says that that
restitution package
needs to be negotiated between the
traditional owners
and the uh rio tinto executives
so that's that i guess the magnitude of
that money is still to be decided but
this is a key recommendation from this
report and also
the expectation that the rock shelter
area will be
fully reconstructed at the cost of the
mining company
and anna does the committee want to see
governments act too
there are absolutely a number of
recommendations here that go to what the
wa government needs to do
in response to the evidence that's been
heard as well as the federal government
in the first instance the call is being
made for the wa government to
significantly strengthen
uh its protections for traditional
owners and for
sacred sites to ensure that something
like this can't occur again
and that there be a moratorium on other
section
18 approvals so the the legislation
uh that has allowed uh a mining company
to go ahead with the destruction
of uh the juken gorge site in the first
instance
earlier this year so on a federal level
as well there is
recommendations in relation to how this
needs to be managed federally
and the need to bolster the the federal
engagement on this
and a call for the these issues to be
dealt with through the minister for
indigenous australians and through that
department
because at the moment they're being
dealt with foremost through the
department of environment
anna what has the committee said about
the issue of gag clauses in agreements
with traditional owners
well all throughout these
recommendations there are references to
this
issue of gag clauses it came up in the
committee hearings
uh where the politicians who were
speaking to traditional owners
and and to the wider community of people
who were involved in this process
heard evidence about the fact that
traditional owners
had difficulties raising their concerns
because they were under basically
contractual agreements
not to make their voices heard publicly
so there's a recommendation specifically
to rio tinto
that they should not have gag clauses in
place for any other ventures
that involve mining operations where
there is a deal with native title
holders
there is also a broader recommendation
for mining companies more generally
that they should make clear publicly
that they will not
impose gag clauses on traditional owners
and on native title holders when
they make arrangements to mine on land
and there's also a more broad element to
this too
that talks to what the federal
government can do to act and that is
a call on the australian government to
seek to prohibit
agreements that restrict traditional
owners from publicly
raising concerns about heritage
protections
overall i think you could say this is an
incredibly detailed set of interim
recommendations
they are not binding on the government
or the parliament to take action but a
clear sign from this committee and its
unanimous report that
quite significant actions should be
taken in response to the destruction of
these caves
anna henderson reporting from canberra
here are the top stories on abc news a
new south wales teenager is facing
charges over terrorism-related offences
with police alleging he tried to access
instructions to make bombs on the
internet the 18 year old is alleged to
have
an extreme right-wing ideology linked to
white supremacy
the teenager was arrested in albury in
the state south earlier today
the federal government is standing firm
in the face of significant criticism of
its industrial relations legislation
which the union movement and labor are
vowing to fight
one of the changes would give the fair
work commission power to allow
businesses
hit by covert 19 to strike pay deals but
that would leave
some people worse off the federal
opposition says the government is using
the crisis
to cut workers pay
new zealand's prime minister has paid
tribute to the victims of last year's
white island tragedy 22 people including
17 australians
died when the volcano erupted a year ago
off the coast of whakatani jacinda
ardern says the victims and their
families have a strong connection
with the local community
and a broom surfer has had a close
encounter
with a shark at cable beach in wa
sam hazeltine was knocked off his board
before leaving the water with friends he
then found
suspected bite marks on his board the
incident comes less than a month
after a 59 year old man was killed by a
shark at the same beach
consumer confidence is continuing to
surge the latest
and z roy morgan figures show household
sentiment
at its best levels in a year people
appear to be more confident about an
economic recovery and willing to spend
in the lead-up to christmas
for more i'm joined by adelaide timbrel
an economist at the anz bank
adelaide thanks so much for your time
tonight just tell us a little bit more
about these figures and what they show
sure
so we have seen the highest consumer
confidence level as you said people in
particular
are feeling really confident about their
own financial conditions
and have also seen a lot more confidence
of the future economic conditions
um we also saw that um time to buy a
household item is up by 1.5
so people are more willing to spend
money they're looking forward into
the future with a little bit more
optimism and we're seeing that reflected
in black friday sales as well so we
actually saw a 40
uplift in black friday sales compared to
last year
yeah so is that because people didn't
spend throughout the pandemic and now
they are starting to spend again
well it's actually the opposite we saw
more retail spending through the
pandemic than we have in normal year
and the reason for that is that while
there are a lot of people who
have not been able to access ways to
earn money
there are even more people who have not
where their key financial difference
between the pandemic and pre-pandemic
is their access to spending money so
instead of you know spending money on
that wedding
or that europe trip or some of those
entertainment and travel services
people have been focused really on the
retail sector instead
and we've seen that um in record black
friday sales
which were 74 higher than just two years
ago and actually our google search
trends show that um
we saw um between 2018 and 2019
google searches for black friday sales
actually doubled so there's
part of it is that real growing
popularity in the sales event itself
but we're also seeing some more consumer
confidence
people are spending more on physical
goods because they can't spend as much
on other things
and people are feeling more confident
about you know having that money coming
back to them next year as well
so if they're spending record amounts on
black friday sales
are they still spending money on
christmas gifts
so we think that part of the black
friday sales growth is about
uh moving spending from that christmas
rush in the last week
to uh christmas eve into november
but it's not like that for all
categories so we see that um
last year in particular for homewares
department store spending and electronic
spending
people moved about um half of their
spending to black friday in some cases
um or at least half uh in terms of their
average daily spend of that last week
whereas things like clothing and jewelry
or toys hobbies and outdoor retailers
we still see it really more in that last
week so depending on the type of
retailer um
either a lot will be pulled forward or
this will just be the beginning of a
huge christmas rush
either way we do think that christmas is
going to be pretty strong
maybe not quite as strong as black
friday was um as a single day
but that week to christmas eve could be
you know six black fridays in
itself and so what's behind this uptick
in consumer sentiments is it optimism
about a vaccine roll out globally
yeah the vaccine definitely has a lot to
do with it we know that australia is a
country where
immigration tourism and those um
movements between countries are really
important and so
the prospect of a vaccine the first half
of next year definitely helps
we know that gdp really bounced back a
bit more than expected
in the september quarter so anyone who's
keeping on top of that economic
commentary knows that things are
recovering a lot quicker
we also know that unemployment really
isn't as high as we thought it would be
you know six months ago and i think
people are more and more feeling secure
in their jobs
they're looking out they're seeing
people spending money they're seeing
lockdowns ended
they're seeing those interstate borders
open uh and with the vaccine as well
there's a lot of reasons to be
optimistic about the future
yeah so have we seen that sentiment has
fully recovered now from the covert
recession
so it is um as high as it was uh
pre-pandemic
but we do have to remember that 2019
wasn't in itself a boom year
so we did see some decreases in consumer
confidence are through 2019
and we're kind of back to that you know
things are going okay
kind of vibe when it comes to the
consumer confidence um but certainly you
know we've got some ways to go and i
think over the next six months we may
see it come to a much more
optimistic and kind of peak-like
standpoint okay so you think that
optimism will only continue to grow
even when things like the job keeper
payment disappears and job seeker may
eventually be tapered down well look
there are going to be bumps in the road
and as job keeper comes down there will
be some bumps there but we've actually
already seen job keeper
really reduce in the december quarter
and it hasn't seemed to hit its spending
too much
it hasn't hit consumer confidence too
much yet and so businesses are probably
recovering faster than expected
and faster than the job keeper timeline
really accounted for
so we're much more likely to see less
business closures
and less of that rise in unemployment
than what we would have expected at the
start of that job keeper program
adelaide timbrel really good to get your
thoughts thanks for joining us
thank you australia's fleet of super
hornets
and growler warplanes has been grounded
after a runway emergency in queensland
an investigation team has been sent to
the amberley air base outside brisbane
where two crew members were yesterday
forced to eject from their 75 million
dollar super hornet during an aborted
takeoff
both pilots are safe but 35 air force
jets have stopped flying
until the cause of the incident is known
this needs to undergo a suitable level
of investigation to get
the right answers so that we can provide
the right solutions
two years ago an australian growler jet
burst into flames just before takeoff in
the united states because of a faulty
engine
police believe human remains found in a
forest near wagga wagga in the new south
wales river arena are those of missing
woman alicia boyd
the 27 year old was last seen alive in
2017.
melinda haita has more from leicester
state forest
i'm standing in the leicester state
forest where yesterday police say
they found human remains now those
remains are yet to be dna tested but
police
strongly believe they are those of
missing woman alicia boyd
the 27 year old was last seen alive in
coolman in the new south wales riverina
in august
2017. superintendent bob noble the
commander of the riverina police
district
said the discovery yesterday will
provide some closure for her family
our investigators along with forensic
services have resumed what appeared to
be the remains of a human
in an area where where investigators
have been told that alicia was buried
obviously those remains have yet to be
formally identified
however given the circumstances and the
information we have
we do believe there's a very very strong
likelihood they are the remains of
alicia board
obviously those remains will go off for
a forensic examination
and hopefully positive identification
investigators have been in touch with
the family
and uh whilst they are very pleased with
the breakthrough and appreciative of the
efforts of police they await the formal
identification of those remains
samuel john shepard was sentenced
earlier this year to 27 years
imprisonment for the murder of miss boyd
and two others a man and a woman have
been sentenced
in relation to being accessories after
the fact ms boyd's sister rhiannon
posted about the discovery on facebook
this morning
she said the family is in disbelief that
it's a very bittersweet moment
but they can finally now lay alicia to
rest
a million dollar reward has been offered
for information into the murder of a
woman
in the new south wales hunter valley
more than 26 years ago
melissa hunt's body was found near a dam
and her family
is pleading for answers so it can
finally have some closure
kylie cook reports 22 year old melissa
hunt died of severe head injuries
the mother of two's body was found near
a dam at stockhrigton in the hunter
valley on anzac day in 1994.
a strike force was set up to investigate
miss hunt's murder
and a coronal inquest was held in 1998
but no arrests have been made her
brother peter hallett says
it's been a difficult 26 years and the
family need answers
it's time to tell your secrets
i'm appealing on behalf of all who love
melissa
make these 26 years count make this
moment count
by coming forward now with information
crime stoppers to unsolved homicide
teams to myself
let melissa and all who love her
finally have this small measure of peace
the case is being reinvestigated and the
new south wales government is offering a
million dollar reward for information
leading to the conviction of anyone
associated with miss hunt's murder
homicide squad commander detective
superintendent danny doherty
says a number of people are being
reinterviewed
from what we can gather a lot of people
had left the lake macquarie newcastle
area and have gone into state
we've gone to queensland victoria and
south australia so
police are appealing for those people
also to come forward
in october police returned to the dam
where miss hunt's body was found and
conducted
a full review of the crime scene items
that were recovered during
initial inquiries are also undergoing
further forensic examination
anyone with information no better how
big or small is being urged to contact
crime stoppers
authorities have closed broome's cable
beach after a shark incident
this morning a man was surfing off the
west australian beach
around seven o'clock when a shark
approached him and bit his board police
say the surfer was not
injured but has been left shaken tyne
logan has the latest
well what we know at the moment is that
at seven o'clock this morning here at
cable beach a man who was surfing about
50 meters
offshore was oh his board was bitten by
a shark
reports are that it was a large shark
the species is
not identified yet now thankfully the
man is uninjured although of course
he's very shaken up it's been considered
a very lucky
escape conditions wise of course it's
incredibly blustery here at the moment
but
that wind that we're experiencing did
mean there was a lot of surface here
because the swell was quite high i was
here at 6 30 this morning and there was
certainly
a lot of people in the water at that
time
now visibility because of that wind and
i guess just the time of year means the
water is incredibly murky as well
you can barely see your toes just wading
into the water just to give you some
kind of picture of the conditions that
we've got here
now it's come as a real shock to the
community i mean this
shark incident is less than a month
after the facial shark attack we had
here at cable beach on the 22nd of
november
where a 58 year old man died and that
shark attack at the time was the first
broom had experienced in uh
almost three decades so the the
closeness
in time frame to that shark attack it's
really rocked the community
the beach has been closed uh
indefinitely by authorities and police
are investigating as our fisheries
officials
and i guess we'll find out more as the
day goes on but that's what we know so
far
eight former rugby players in the uk is
suing the game's authorities claiming
the sport has left them with
permanent brain damage every member of
the group has recently been diagnosed
with the early signs of dementia
and they say it's due to repeated blows
to the head
for more i'm joined by dr rowena mobs
who's a neurologist at macquarie
university thank you so much for your
time tonight
this seems to be the first action taken
by rugby union players we know in
australia that class action is being put
together by rugby league players
are you surprised given the physicality
of the game that it's taken
this long for rugby to
to take this action um yes karina in one
way i
am surprised it's taken this long i
guess there's been a suspicion over
some decades in fact that repeat her
trauma in sport could associate with
long-term
impairment and what we're seeing in
players through our clinics
is a significant reported trouble with
memory
mood and also behavior like rage attacks
and this is obviously impacting the
families hugely so
i see this as a really important and in
fact probably golden opportunity for
sports to
step up work with the researchers and
others to find the answers on cte and
for our brain health in general
the eight players in the uk in this
initial group all say that they have
early onset dementia
um is that a direct result of the
concussions they experienced in the
sport
it would certainly seem likely that it's
a combination of concussion
and also sub-concussion so the amount of
time the sheer number of years and
often these players have played for 20
or 30 years
with repeat head trauma so anyone might
think in a common sense fashion that
that might add up
and certainly we're seeing this type of
pattern in people very young
so 40s 50s and 60s and beyond so
i think we need to take a stance now in
australia and tackle cte head on
and of course our sports really do
overlap very closely with the uk as far
as rugby
union and rugby league racing and soccer
of course and we've really got
to work together to help find these
answers globally yeah you said that it's
happening
in younger players more and more steve
thompson who's one of the players that's
been named
in these uk reports he's 42 years old he
was one of the
england players who beat australia in
the 2003
world cup in sydney he says he can't
remember
any of the matches from that tournament
have you heard of a situation like that
before
i have i'm afraid this is the story that
i hear day in day out in my clinics
and people are just not remembering
significant events but also particularly
the short-term memory the type of
learning memory seems to be affected
apart from the illiterate irritability
rage depression these sorts of issues
and there's a pattern of decline and of
course it's such a tragedy that
um someone in his position may not
remember these such
important um you know tremendous events
and we've really got to look after our
sporting legends
but we've also got to look after the
families and the grassroots players as
well
he also talked about doing 100 live
scrums in a single training session that
was in the 90s
that doesn't still happen today does it
well when i hear from players they do
identify training as probably the burden
of their repeated trauma so i think
that's
a really big opportunity to have players
join the roundtable discussions here
hear from them as well as trainers of
course as to how we can improve
um training techniques perhaps avoiding
and preventing repeat head trauma
and post-concussion syndrome cte and
um migraine associated head trauma for
example so um
sorry migraine with head trauma so um we
really gotta involve the players as part
of this research
and decision making around protocols
yeah so what what more
can the sports and the governing bodies
be doing here
well now is the time so obviously we're
we're very keen to macro university to
continue our program with the snap ctu
study which is
like boston looking at players over time
every couple of years assessing them for
their brain health
and really trying to show do they have
the cte picture and if so who is at risk
so to do that we're going to need
funding we're going to need support and
collaboration and there's a big push at
the moment for a national
type collaboration um perhaps across
government insurance sporting bodies and
also non-sporting organizations and here
we think of domestic violence
importantly
so this is really wide-ranging and
affects all age groups and many
situations
so the players that you're seeing come
to you what treatment is available to
them
well um like all types of dementia if
they have
cte that is we can certainly manage
symptoms so we're as neurologists and
my geriatrician colleagues my
neuropsychiatry colleagues and sports
physicians we would help
memory we would provide medication for
that sometimes
management of mood working with families
environmental changes
keeping them in the workplace there's a
lot we can do around the management of
dementia
even if we can't cure it much like
alzheimer's unfortunately in 2020
and for the families that are involved
what's the toll that it takes on them
it's huge so we've got a lot of families
suffering
whatever the cause so it would seem to
be that um there could be cte
significant numbers in australia but we
don't know that for sure whatever the
cause they're experiencing memory
troubles cognitive impairment
and with a picture of worsening over
time and the families are suffering
um with these often um significant mood
and behavioral changes as i say
so they're losing their usual social
nuances and that can be so
important in terms of keeping them work
looking after children
staying in life dr robina mobs we really
appreciate you taking the time to speak
to us thank you
david warner has been officially ruled
out of the opening test against india
and adelaide after failing to recover
from a groin strain
warner suffered the injury in the one
day series he'd initially hoped to be
ready for the first
test qriket australia now says he'll
work towards a return
for the boxing day test in melbourne
meanwhile australia defeated india in
the final t20 match in sydney to avoid a
series sweep
the 12-run victory ensures australia
retain second spot on the icc rankings
the baggy green worn by cricketing great
don bradman in his
debut test could fetch a record price
when it goes under the hammer this month
it's been forced onto the market after
its owner was sent to prison for
stealing millions of dollars
leaving dozens of people with nothing
time for the weather
with graham creed it's been a wet and
stormy afternoon across parts of the
country particularly through western
australia not only where we have flood
watches and severe weather warnings for
heavy rainfall
but also flood warnings now across parts
of the northern inland
we're also seeing those flood watches
continue or extend through
into the southwest of the territory and
into the northwest
of south australia severe thunderstorms
across the south of wa and we've also
seen them
in queensland but it's this rainfall
that's set to persist over the next day
or two that we'll see some further
very heavy falls totals of up to 160
millimeters to 9 a.m
very heavy falls in association with
this low pressure system
so far today and it's overnight that we
could see some further very heavy falls
across the region
and will extend into the southwest of
the territory tomorrow and through the
weekend
and also into the northwest of south
australia
there is the potential of flooding there
showers and storms also start to become
a lot more widespread across the north
of the continent
we have had a few uh severe
thunderstorms
develop along this line pretty much from
the central coast all the way through to
the northern peninsula
we are going to see those showers and
storms persisting over the coming days
as well
now for new south wales we're also
looking at the potential of some
localized heavy rainfall it's with the
southerly change but it starts
on friday through the northeast
intensifies as we move
into the end of the weekend and early
part of next week
and at the same time we have the
potential of a tropical cyclone forming
in the south pacific now it's well away
from the australian coastline
but because of its position and also
that high means a very moist
and vigorous easterly wind flow into new
south wales and queensland helping to
feed that moisture
into quite a few upper level and surface
level disturbances set to move through
the north of new south wales
now that change will move up the new
south wales coast tomorrow bringing some
isolated showers we're certainly not
looking at widespread or heavy falls
the total opposite through the northwest
where we will see some heavy rainfall
continuing
and that will move into the northwest of
south australia later in the day and
also
into the southwest of the territory just
some light patchy falls in the alice but
the cloud cover bringing substantially
cooler temperatures
thanks very much graeme remember you can
keep up to date at news.abc.net.au and
on abc eye view i'm karina cavallo
more on our top stories coming up in a
moment stay with us here on abc news
[Music]
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc news and
current affairs programs
head to abc eye view and live stream abc
news now
abc presents a season of programs and
stories
exploring our environment and seeking
solutions to the climate challenge
your planet on abc tv iview radio
and online abc.net dot a u slash
your planet grandstand summer of cricket
continues
live and ad free as australia face off
against fierce rivals india
every test all the rivalry called live
at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio
and the abc listen app welcome to
oneplus one i'm stan grant starting
monday
a life-changing moment i really lost
myself
felt like a real failure and the road to
acceptance sometimes you just need to
ride the wave how did you
great question she's been with me and
allowed me to find myself
stan grant's one plus one monday abc and
eye view
anywhere anytime a summer of
entertainment awaits on abc eye view
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
[Applause]
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're clean squeaky i
decided to stand up last night and i'll
continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef which is like
it's in my dna put me in it
your summer time streaming is on abc eye
view
in the summertime
spiks and specs returns for a special
episode celebrating music of the 2010s
whether you like to shout geronimo as
you swing from the chandelier or you'd
rather shake it off and get lucky
we've got a show that'll hit you like a
wrecking ball
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
with team captains miff warhurst and
alan bro
see you very soon australia the sphix
and specs 2010 special
sunday december 20th on abc and iview
[Music]
i am